+++
title = "PyCon CZ - Day 1"
slug = "pycon-cz-day-1"
date = 2017-06-08T14:05:41-02:00
tags = ['confs', ' python']

+++

The day started at 9.00, and at first it was time of check-in, etc.
After that, I solved one riddle by `kiwi.com`, and earned a discount in
flights, which was a nice way to start the conference.

Then after breakfast and some networking going through the booths of the
sponsors, it was time for the first talk of the day: \"*When bugs bite -
why neglecting edge cases can kill*\".

It was a great talk, a case for software engineering in general (it\'s
not Python-specific, which is what makes the topic more interesting).
The best thing I liked about the talk was the remarks, and the idea of
shifting the mindset when it comes to development, so we should do some
\"negative thinking\" in the form of *what can go wrong with this?* *How
can this fail?*, and such. It\'s important, because this is critical in
order to make robust software. Most problems I have seen on software
bugs were related to some optimistic thinking, and even worse,
optimistic unit testing, in the way that developers only test for
happy-path scenarios, without thinking all sort of things that can go
wrong.

Afterwards, was the time for the talk about parallel processing (*poor
person\'s parallel processing*), which was fine. Then I spent some time
tackling some of the challenges sponsors had available, so I did some
coding and recap of the events so far.

Then I listened to a talk about
[wolfcrypt](https://cz.pycon.org/2017/speakers/detail/talk/28/#main)
which is a tool for `crypto` in Python. The talk introduced some
`crypto` concepts (symmetric `crypto`, public key, etc.), which was
good. Most of the questions revolved around comparison with other tools
in python (default libraries, `pycrypto`, etc.).

Then it was time for lunch and do some more coding, and the next talk I
attended to was called \"*should I mock or should I not?*\", which I
liked very much and gave some food for thought.

Then it came one more talk, after which it was time for mine, so I
presented *clean code in Python*. There were some interesting questions,
and the entire presentation went relatively quickly.

Once the talk sessions were over, there was one last track for lightning
talks, which are always super entertaining.

After the finish of the first day, I attended the speaker\'s dinner,
which was a nice opportunity to network with the community, which is
always great.

Looking forward to some more interesting talks tomorrow, and to see the
results of the challenges.
